# TITLE

Basically it's about how and why it's very difficult to introduce ML to a medium-sized org,
with accompanying caveats and why that actually might be wrong at the end.

Note: when I'm talking about "ML",
I'm referring to the construction of an ML system that's integrated into the existing
business and technical infrastructure. Not some models in an NB. Not using ChatGPT to
write SQL query, or Perplexity to do some research.

## You Look Like a medium to me

Small companies, I'm talking really here about start-ups, have a binary question to answer:
is ML going to be a core component of what we do, or not?

Predicting the outcome of cricket matches? ML is intrinsic.
Providing an app for companies to check employee mental health? ML not needed.

The decision is binary.

Large companies are in a surprisingly similar position: an ML system already exists
(and is probably a core part of what they do), or it doesn't, at all. In the case of
the latter, they can easily ignore it (for now). The company is successful without it.
Alternatively they can throw lots and lots of money and time at the problem.

Medium-sized companies are in a trickier situation (again, I'm talking mostly about
contemporary, tech-enabled, scale-ups). They usually have something that's kind of
working, that has been scaled to a certain extent. But this success can be a curse:
the preceding period of growth/funding/building stuff that "just worked" means that
now systems and processes throughout the business are a bit fucked. The platform may
be unstable/not fit for scale, key employees may have left without proper handovers
or documentation, there could be a sudden emphasis on profitability, tech and 
tech expertise might be now slightly out-dated, etc. All of these things, and more,
as we shall see, make it difficult to build an ML system.

## Specific Problems

I will now go through some general challenges associated with building an ML system,
and then tell you how these problems are more acute at medium-sized orgs.

### Costs

Building an ML system costs money and other resources. Medium-sized companies
are often unable to commit these resources to something new that may or may not
be financially beneficial.

As I just said, scale-ups are more likely that others to be in some kind of
cost-cutting/profitability phase. And they're more-likely to have a bigger emphasis
on short-term/medium-term costs, and reducing these, to show investors that
the financial situation is A-ok CHECK.

Compare this to large companies, who make a lot of money. They can afford to throw
these large piles of money at problems. This includes the problem of building an ML system.

### Time horizon

The reason MSCs are more concerned with costs is their time horizon: they are often looking for some
round of funding or exit in the near future. Hence an unwillingness in general to invest in
long-term projects.

They're kind of in a difficult position, product-wise. It's often unclear whether they need to make
fundamental improvements (but, I don't know, introducing ML), or if they just need to scale more.
There are all types of factors at play here which complicate the situation.

Both small and large companies have an advantage here. The big boys have a theoretically infinite time
horizon to play with. They can afford to do an R&D project for a couple og years with no pay off. They 
can also afford to invest in something now that will have benefits int he long term. Short-term
thinking is unfortunately incentivised, but at least they can theoretically justify long-term investment.

Start-ups have a definitively long-term view. It takes 10 years to build a successful company, so although
they are strapped for cash, they sort of have to take a long-term view and make long-term investments.

### Data

Again, MSCs are cursed. They have _some_ data, but it's unclear if they have enough for the investment required
to properly utilise this data to be worth it. 

Large companies obviously have reems of data coming out their ears' so this isn't a problem.
And small companies have a plan to leverage the small amount of data they have, use publicly-available
data, or not use ML at all.

### Platform

The platform and systems of scale-ups are often either

1) just generally fucked
2) not built to scale
3) use outdated technology
or 
4) most or all of the above

Meaning a few things. First, everyone is fairly reticent to introduce new services and systems because
these are a pain to integrate and these put more load/stress on the existing infrastructure. Second,
it's hard to justify adding these given the tech debt and required re-build/improvements of the 
current infrastructure.

Small companies, by contrast, are building from scratch so can design their systems with ML in mind.

At large companies, although their own systems are often severally antiquated and a mess, have teams
of people to deal with specific issues, so there's no risk of the data science team doing engineering
work.

### Expertise

They (large corps) can afford to hire specific teams and experts to design and implement the system.
Because although the mission might not be as honourable, the technology not as cutting-edge, and the
use cases not as exciting, what they can offer are exceedingly comfortable and superficially-appealing
positions.

Start-ups have the advantage of working on exciting, problems, with equity in a potentially-very-valuable
business, and a chance to shape ML at the company in all the ways your want to.

Scale-ups have neither of these. And consequently have trouble attracting expertise. They may have some
already at the company, but it's probably fairly raw, and hence will take time to properly leverage.

## TITLE

### Let's all work together

You can kind of see how all these things work in conjunction CHECK (against MSCs).

Large corporations have found something that's working, so they have money and a long-term view.
They are able to hire a specific team to implement a system that has obvious (because of their
huge amounts of data) long-term benefits.

Small corporations can attract top talent to build a system from scratch to solve a novel problem.
The system doesn't have to be immediately scalable or profitable, but has the potential to be
so in the future, allowing the founding participants to be the lead of a substantial ML team
at a successful company.

Medium-sized corporations are faced with a dilemma. They have a product/service that's kind of working.
Fixing outstanding issues with the organisation, platform, and product, as well as focusing on
reducing costs and proving (at least potential) profitability take priority over introducing new
components, that have questionable value-add because of a lack of big data and expertise to leverage 
this data effectively, that will have to be integrated, and will add extra load to, the already-stressed infrastructure.
Because these corporations have a medium-term view: they are focused on doing what's necessary to
earn their next fudning round, or exit.

### It's not all bad

MSCs do have some advantages over other companies.

Start-ups have no data or existing infrastructure. They are also poor, so can't afford to make
non-critical investments in just about anything.

Large companies (some of them) have cursed infrastructure from like the 90s or something that
literally 100 people in the global job market know how to interact with. They also have
big risk teams and compliance and board members who only give a shit about profits next quarter and that
stock price go up. 

It's also not a binary problem. It's not like companies have a choice between building a full ML system, or
not. In reality, one can (I can do it single-handed-ly CHECK, for example) get a basic system operational fairly 
quickly. Which can be iterated upon. And there is always the option of course to not create a system and
use ML for isolated projects.

So maybe it's not so bad for scale-ups after all? Or maybe it is.





















